---
title: Apple in a Box
draft: true
---

## Introduction

My goal with this article is to outline a way of thinking about fundamental
things we see in the universe, but using reversible cellular automata to think
about them.

## Reversible Cellular Automata

Reversible cellular automata are a type of cellular automata where the same
rule applies both forward and backward.

This means that the second law
of thermodynamics applies which means we can reason about entropy in the same
way as we do about entropy of real world systems.

You'll start with a law state of entropy, as the simulation goes on, entropy
tends to increase.

## The Problem with the Game of Life

The Game of Life is a type of cellular automata that was created by
mathematician John Horton Conway. The Game of Life is probably the most well
known cellular automata. The problem with it is that entropy tends to decrease
as the simulation goes on. This is due to the rule only applying forwards and
not backwards. This makes it not useful for thinking about life or the universe,
as it does not emulate real world processes.

## Machines

Once you have a reversible cellular automata, you can start thinking about the
concept of a "machine". In traditional cellular automata, a machine is generally
perpetual, meaning that it repeats itself forever. This is unlike any process we
observe in our universe. In order to build a machine in a reversible cellular
automata, it is either all encompassing or it "breaks down". This later property
makes it very interesting to think about.

It is fun to write your name into a cellular -- TODO

## Apple in a Box

The "apple in a box" is a thought experiment, whereby if you have an apple in a
perfectly closed box and wait an infinite amount of time, the apple will reform
in the future into its exact same state, you may have to wait a quadrillion
years. This is the exact same behaviour as you'd observe in a reversible
cellular automata. If you deployed a machine into a reversible cellular
automata, you could forward the state N number of times until the machine
magically reformed back into itself.

Although this thought experiment is interesting, it is not at all helpful. This
is because you'd have to wait an unreasonable amount of time before you see the
apple form again.

What is more interesting is running the rules in reverse. What came before the
apple? What created it?

## The Big Bang

By virtue of the reversible nature of reversible cellular automata, we can
reverse the simulation and find out what created our supposed machine. The
"name" construction would spontaneously form from the coaleasing of gas and
dust. However, I'm here to argue that machines never form from gas and dust.
Instead, they form from a series of long running processes. If we forward back
in time, we should see the birth of the universe.

There's a subtle powerful idea here that closely ties with assembly theory which
shows that it is in fact impossible to build a machine manually inside a
reversible cellular automata. There are only a few universes that exist which do
so, they must be found at random.
